see look I had second thoughts really
about whether I could talked about this
to such a vital and alive audience as
you guys but then I remember the quote
from Gloria Steinem which goes the truth
will set you free but first it will piss
you off so
so with that in mind I'm going to set
about trying to do those things here and
talk about dying in the 21st century now
the first thing that will piss you off
undoubtedly is that all of us are in
fact going to die in the 21st century
there will be no exceptions to that
there are apparently about one in eight
of you who think you're immortal on
surveys but unfortunately that isn't
this isn't going to happen while I give
this talk in the next 10 minutes a
hundred million of my cells will die and
over the course of today 2,000 of my
brain cells will die and never come back
so you could argue that the dying
process starts pretty early in the piece
anyway the second thing I want to say
about dying in the 21st century problem
is going to happen to everybody is it's
shaping up to be a bit of a train wreck
for most of us unless we do something to
try and reclaim this process from the
rather an exabyte reject tree that is
currently on so there you go that's the
truth no doubt that will piss you off
and now let's see whether we can set you
free I don't promise anything now as you
heard in the intro of care and I think
I've kind of lived through the heyday of
intensive care it's been a ride man this
has been fantastic we have machines that
go ping there's many of them up there
and we have some wizard technology which
i think has worked really well and over
the course of the time I've worked an
intensive care the death rate for males
in Australia has halved and intensive
care has had something to do with that
certainly a lot of the technologies that
we use have got something to do with
that so we have had tremendous success
and we we kind of got caught up in our
own success quite a bit and we started
using expressions like life-saving I
really apologize for everybody for doing
that because obviously we don't what we
do is prolong people's lives and delay
death and redirect death but we we can't
strictly speaking save lives on any sort
of permanent basis and what's really
happened over the period of time that
I've been working in intensive care is
that the people whose lives we started
saving back in the 70s 80s and 90s are
now coming to die in the 21st century of
diseases that we no longer have the
answers to
in quite the way we did then so what's
happening now is there's been a big
shift in the way that people die and
most of what they're dying off now isn't
as amenable to what we can do as what it
used to be like when I was doing this in
the 80s and 90s so we kind of we kind of
got a bit caught up with this and we
haven't really squared with you guys
about what's really happening now and
it's about time we did I kind of woke up
to this bit in the late 90s when I met
this guy this guy is called Jim Jim
Smith and he looked like this I was
called down to the ward to see him his
is the little hand I was called down the
wall to see him by a respiratory
physician he said look there's a guy
down here he's got pneumonia and he
looks like he needs intensive care his
daughters here and she wants everything
possible to be done which is a familiar
phrase to to us so I go down to the
warden see Jim and his skin is
translucent like this you can see his
bones through the skin he's very very
thin and he is indeed very much very
sick with pneumonia and he's too sick to
talk to me so I talked to his daughter
Kathleen and I say to her
did you and Jim ever talk about what you
would want done if he ended up in this
kind of situation and she looked at me
she said no of course not okay take this
steady and I got talking to her and
after a while she said to me you know we
always thought there'd be time Jim was
and I realized that something wasn't
happening here there wasn't this
dialogue going on that I imagined was
happening so a group of us started doing
survey work and we looked at four and a
half thousand nursing home residents in
Newcastle in the Newcastle area and
discovered that only one in a hundred of
them had a plan about what to do when
their heart stopped beating one in a
hundred and only one in five hundred of
them had a plan about what to do if they
became seriously ill I realized of
course this dialogue is Jeff definitely
not occurring in the public at large
when I work in acute care this is John
Hunter Hospital and I thought surely we
we do better than than that so a
colleague of mine from nursing called
Lisa Shore and I went through hundreds
and hundreds of sets of notes in their
medical records department looking at
whether there was any sign at all that
anybody had had he had any conversation
about what might happen to them if the
treatment they were receiving was
unsuccessful to the point that they
would die and we didn't find a single
record of any preference about goals
treatments or outcomes from any of the
sets of notes initiated by a doctor or
by a patient so we started to realise
that we had a problem and the problem is
more serious because of this what we
know is that obviously we are all going
to die but how we die is actually really
important obviously not just to us but
also to how that features in the lives
of all the people who live on afterwards
how we die lives on in the minds of
everybody who survives us and the stress
created in families by dying is enormous
and in fact you get seven times as much
stress by dying in intensive care as by
dying just about anywhere else so dying
in intensive care is not your top option
if if you've got a choice and if that
wasn't bad enough of course all of this
is rapidly progressing towards the fact
that many of you in fact about one in
ten of you at this point will die in
intensive care in the US it's one in
five in Miami it's three out of five
people die in intense
care so this is the sort of momentum
that we've got at the moment the reason
why this is all happening is due to this
and I do have to take you through what
this what this is about these are the
four ways to go so one of these will
happen to all of us
the ones you may know most about are the
ones that are becoming increasingly of
historical interest southern death it's
quite likely in an audience this size
this won't happen to anybody here sudden
death has become very rare the death of
Little Nell and Cordelia and all that
sort of stuff just doesn't happen
anymore
the dying process of those would
terminal illness that we've just seen
occurs to younger people by the time
you've reached 80 this is unlikely to
happen to you only one in ten people who
are over 80 will die of cancer the big
growth industry of these what you die of
is increasing organ failure with your
respiratory cardiac renal whatever
organs packing up each of these would be
an admission to an acute care hospital
at the end of which or at some point
during which somebody says enough is
enough and we stop and this one's the
biggest growth industry of all and at
least six out of ten of the people in
this room will die this form which is
the dwindling of capacity with
increasing frailty and frailties an
inevitable part of Aging and increasing
frailty is in fact the main thing that
people die off now and the last few
years or last year of your life is spent
with a great deal of disability
unfortunately enjoying it so far
so I just feel such a and feels such a
Cassandra here what can I say this
positive was positive is that this is
happening at very great age now we are
we are all most of us living to to reach
this point you know historically we
didn't do that this is what happens to
you when you live to be a great age
and unfortunately increasing longevity
does mean more old age not more youth
than I'm sorry to say that what we did
anyway look what we did we didn't just
take this lying down at John Hunter
Hospital and elsewhere we've started a
whole series of projects to try and look
about whether we could in fact involve
people much more in the way that in the
way that things happen to them but we
realize of course that we are dealing
with cultural issues and this is I love
this Klimt painting because if you the
more you look at it the more you kind of
get the whole issue that's going on here
which is clearly the death the
separation of death from the living and
the fear like if you actually look
there's one woman there who has her eyes
open she's the one he's looking at and
he's the one he's coming for can you see
that she looks terrifying some amazing
picture anyway we had a major cultural
issue clearly people didn't want us to
talk about death or we thought that so
with loads of funding from the federal
government and the local health service
we introduced the thing that John Hunter
called respecting patient choices we
trained hundreds of people to go to the
wards and talk to people about the fact
that they would die and what would they
prefer under those circumstances they
loved it the families and the patients
they loved it 998 percent of people
really thought this just should be
normal practice and then this is how
things should work and when they
expressed wishes all of those wishes
came true as it were we were able to
make that happen for them but then when
the funding ran out we went back to look
six months later and everybody had
stopped again and nobody was having
these conversations anymore so that was
really kind of heartbreaking for us
because we thought this was going to
really take off the cultural issue had
reasserted itself so here's the pitch I
think it's important that we don't just
get on this freeway - I see you without
thinking hard about whether or not that
where we're all want to end up
particularly has become older and
increasingly frail and ICU has less and
less and less to offer us there has to
be a little side road side road off
there for people who don't want to go on
that track and I have one small idea and
one big idea about what could happen and
this is a small idea the small idea is
let's all of us engage with more with
this in the way that Jason is
Illustrated why can't we have these
kinds of conversations with our own
elders and people who might be
approaching this there are a couple of
things you can do one of them is you can
just ask this simple question this this
question never fails in the event that
you became too sick to speak for
yourself who would you like to speak for
you that's a really important question
to ask people because giving people the
control over who that is produces an
amazing outcome the second thing you can
say is have you spoken to that person
about the things that are important to
you so that we can I've got a better
idea of what it is we can do so that's a
little idea the big idea I think is more
political I think we have to get on to
this I suggested we should have occupied
death what my wife said I said we're
here right sittings in the mortuary yeah
sure so that one didn't really run but I
did I was very struck by this now I'm an
aging hippies I don't know I don't think
I look like that anymore but I had to -
my kids were born at home in the 80s
when home birth was a big thing and then
we baby boomers are used to taking
charge of the situation so if you just
replace all these all these words of
birth I like peace love natural death as
an option I do think we have to get
political and start to reclaim this
process from the medicalised modeling
which it's going now listen that sounds
like a pitch for euthanasia I want to
make it absolutely crystal clear to you
all I hate euthanasia I think it's a
sideshow I don't think euthanasia
matters I actually think that that in
country in places like Oregon where you
can have physician assistants suicide
you take a
poisonous dose and stuff only half a
percent of people ever do that I'm more
interested in what happens to the 99.5
percent of people who don't want to do
that I think most people don't want to
be dead but I do think most people want
to have some control over how their
dying process proceeds so I'm a moment
of euthanasia but I do think we have to
give people back some control its
deprives euthanasia of its oxygen supply
I think we should be looking at stopping
the want for euthanasia not for making
it illegal or legal or worrying about it
at all this is a quote from from Dame
Cicely Saunders whom I met when I was a
medical student she founded the hospice
movement and she says you matter because
you are and you matter to the last
moment of your life and I firmly believe
that that's the message that we have to
carry forward thank you